Myself from A&M and Dr. Hebel Hoff from Baylor College of Medicine.
And so we wrote a proposal.
We met stuck away in a glass building over on
Over on old Post Oak Road or somewhere for days, planning, dreaming up how to do a college of medicine at A&M.
And using Baylor as the clinical, for the clinical years at A&M,
for the basic years.
And that proposal, the first proposal is now in the archives at A&M.
I remember giving them a copy and it has pictures of everybody and it's involved and all these things.
And so Dr. Hoff was appointed the first acting dean of the College of Medicine at Texas A&M University.
This, again, is something that's probably not recorded or known anywhere.
Jim Knight was the first dean, but Hebel moved up here and lived in an apartment here and was the first acting dean of the College of Medicine.
And so we prepared a proposal
to go to the American Medical Association Committee on Education for that medical school.
We prepared it, and we had to stand reviews by the Council on Education for the program.
And the one that headed that first reviewing team, or that was head of the American
Medical Association Educational Counsel was a person by the name of Dr. Jimmy Schofield.
And Dr. Schofield had been an associate dean for, at Baylor College of Medicine, and this I would not discredit anybody, but
it seemed that Jimmy had some problem at Baylor and was released.
Now, I thank that.
Now, I don't want to, I wouldn't, but anyhow, Dr. Schofield was on the reviewing team and he,
had decided that there were not enough beds in the Texas Medical Center for A&M to have use it.
And that's, of course, there's more beds down there, and they've since built another whole medical school there.
But anyhow, we had to come back and approach it in another way.
And Congressman Owen Teague entered into the picture, and he said, well, we'll just do that with the Veterans Administration Hospital in Temple.
We'll use that as a teaching hospital.
And he appropriated $10 million for that initial
look-see into that collaboration.
Let me, this is a note to the typist.
As dean of faculties at that time, I was working on the law school proposal, but was in the office next door to Dick Winerti, who was the key person here relating to the A&M administration about the medical school.
And one day, somewhere, I happened to find reference to the fact that Dr. Schofield had been on the Baylor staff and had left under circumstances not of his choosing.
and suggested that perhaps that was the difficulty we were really facing in not being able to get a tentative accreditation by the American Association for Medical Education, and suggested that maybe if we did not
tie our request to Baylor that maybe we could get our tentative accreditation.
The local administration decided to drop the Baylor link and our accreditation, that's not the right word, right phrase, anyway, we got authority to begin
quickly by linking only with the VA and Scott and White in Temple instead of having a three-way arrangement of Scott and White and Baylor.
But this is a dream that might have been if we could have had the Baylor link also, end of note.
So after that, after Mr. T got involved and he put the money in for the VA, we also started working with the people at Temple, Scott and White.
And we found opposition all the way along the road to A&M having a medical school.
Well, Scott and White thought that it would take too much of their staff time to train
medical students.
And then, so Dr. McNerdy was to take care of that, and then we were getting opposition locally from medical doctors in the community that they didn't want a school here.
And so I was given the task of working with the local medical association, trying to get their approval.
And there was a doctor, T.O.
Walton was
president of that group.
And so I finally got them to agree that, you know, it would be a good thing that we weren't going to train lots of doctors here and put them out in competition to them, that they'd have access to medical library and seminars and programs and all that.
We got that approval, Dr. Venerdi, working with the people at Scott and White, finally got them to agree to it.
And so, with all the things in place, we got First Medical School approved.
I got a call one morning.
that it was approved, and we need to start taking students in about two or three months, and they wanted me to design a medical facility, teaching facility, and wanted it by noon.
So I went to the Owen E. Teague building, took the, I believe it was the first floor, maybe the second floor in the basement, drew up pathology labs, a lecture lab, a physiology laboratories,
administrative facilities and drafted that by noon.
And they started to work on it the next week.
And in about two, two and a half months, we had a medical basic medical school in the old ET building.
And do you have a comment?
No, no.
OK.
And so that was the first medical school, and Dr. Knight was hired as the dean.
Dr. Hoff having, since it didn't involve Baylor, if it had involved Baylor, Dr. Hoff would have been the dean.
instead of acting dean, but when it got involved with Scott and White and VA, it was changed.
So that was the beginning of the medical school at Texas A&M and the Institute of Comparative Medicine.
And it all went back to Ed McMurray.
Now, along this same feeling of developing medicine here, and as Dr. Monroe said, the president of A&M wanted, his thoughts were that A&M, he wanted to
get all other universities, colleges, relationships removed from Texas A&M University's system.
That included Prairie View and Arlington and Tarleton and everybody, and have a complete university at College Station, which would include all of the colleges necessary for a university, including law and medicine.
Now this was Rudder?
No, Jack Kenny.
And he and Dr. Monroe will know as much or more than I on the law side since I was in the medical side of it.
that Dr. Williams told me one time that the South Texas Law School in Houston had agreed to become a part of the A&M system.
We had no opposition from anybody at that time, as far as I know.
But they would not move from Houston, Texas to College Station.
And again, it was his vision that all of this would be located under one umbrella on one campus, and we would not have to share any available funds or any other resources with anybody else.
And that was his vision.
If he could see us today with the sprawling, administrative, unwieldy organizational structure that we're under with about 10 or 15 universities and dental schools and
Everything else, President Williams would certainly turn flips, but we have now diluted our resources tremendously.
But anyhow, we were not able to bring that law school.
We did get the medical school.
Again, if Mr. Rutter had not been so set in his ways, we would have had Baylor College of Medicine.
And if Dr. Williams hadn't been so adamant about the location of the College of Law, we would have a College of Law at the College Station.
And we'd have been self-contained, and I don't know if we'd been better off or not.
Let me, this is another note to the typist to add.
It is my understanding, that means I'm not positive, I don't have any proof of it, but it is my understanding that one of the straws that broke the animals back in the negotiations about South Texas College of Law was not only that they didn't want to move,
but also that at the state level, some authority said that if A&M did take up the South Texas College of Law, that A&M could never offer law courses outside Harris County.
And I do know that Dr. Williams wanted there to be law here.
And so it did not come about.
But the medical arrangement came about because of so much good work by so many people and
the cost to the taxpayers of Texas for an additional medical school was very, very reasonable.
End of note.
Now, J.D., back to your own story.
You went down there in the early 60s to Baylor, and you came back up here when, full-time?
I came, I put in for an extension of my leave.
I had been granted a two-year leave absence, and I was
enjoying everything in Houston.
I hadn't quite finished my dissertation.
And the Medical Center, going back to the stimulus, being in the Texas Medical Center as I was, and being the first veterinarian and somehow having developed a real fine rapport and respect amongst all the physicians,
They were just totally amazed that a veterinarian could do what a veterinarian could do, everything from infectious disease to dental to surgery to everything else and they were beginning to specialize themselves more and more.
Anyhow, they wanted me to stay and I wanted to stay and I wanted to finish my, complete all my dissertation and some of the
things that I had started in the medical center and I was also working with the VA and MD Anderson at the same time in the rehabilitation center and the dental school.
And so
I asked for an extension and could not get it.
And I understand why Dr. Burns would not ask for an extension because he said I had to be back in College Station on June the 1st.
because, for one thing, they were starting the trimester program, which meant instead of four years of veterinary training, it took three years of veterinary training going year-round, and I had to be here to initiate that trimester program.
which meant starting at 7 o'clock every morning with lectures and lecture a half day and then laboratory every afternoon, again with no help.
And he couldn't do it.
I mean, so I had to come back to help start the trimester program.
And I really hated to leave.
the medical center with all the seminars and the doctors that I worked with and the excitement and being, I guess the main thing was just being accepted.
I mean, I could go anywhere in the medical center, into any surgical suite.
I was doing autopsies on human subjects at Ben Taub every Wednesday.
I did all the autopsies, just everything.
was really exciting and, I don't know, it's just such a dynamic situation in that medical center and it's still that way.
And that really piqued my interest in academia and the fact that I still have faculty appointments at Baylor College of Medicine, at MD Anderson, and still have ongoing activities.
But I came back here, helped Brayne Medical School here,
When you came back, what was your initial assignment?
Well, when I came back, I was still an instructor, assistant professor, I guess.
Same department head?
Same department head.
And then I guess it was the next 67, I guess so.
promote the full professor and department head.
Describe the department when you took over.
Well, when I began my activities in the department, we had Dr. Burns was head, Dr. Davis was in it, and myself.
and Dr. McMurray had moved to the dean's office and so I taught all the physiology and Dr. Davis taught all, Richard Davis taught all the pharmacology and then Dr. Burns taught toxicology and then Dr. Davis and I, I saw a need to begin a graduate program
And so we began teaching graduate courses, and Dr. Davis and I taught all the graduate courses.
And our senior architect, I became department head, I saw that the College of Veterinary Medicine had no advanced degree program.
And so I approached the coordinating board with a request for a PhD program in physiology and a PhD program in toxicology.
And there's lots, it takes lots of effort to put in for a Ph.D.
program when you're competing with all of the colleges and universities and state.
And they don't like to see other programs arise.
So my first request for a program in physiology was turned down, according to board.
And I said, you're not very smart.
Why did I ask for a degree in physiology?
And so I went back and prepared a degree in veterinary, Ph.D.
in veterinary physiology.
Went to coordinating board, and there wasn't any way they could turn it down because there wasn't any other veterinary school.
And so I got approval for a degree in veterinary, Ph.D.
in veterinary physiology, and then I went forward soon after for a degree in veterinary toxicology, Ph.D.,
Were those the first doctoral programs, PhD programs in the college?
In the college.
And then began to teach courses and to bring faculty.
And we began, and we already taught a service course in physiology for a
the College of Agriculture, which was a big course load.
And then we began to teach 601, 602 physiology.
and for other students on campus, and it became huge graduate courses of 30 and 40 kids per semester.
We began teaching Brooks Air Force Base students.
We began teaching, then expanding our graduate program to include courses in
cardiovascular physiology and respiratory physiology and endocrinology, pharmacology, toxicology.
And so we built a rather large graduate program.
In fact, at one time we had 70 graduate students enrolled in our little department.
Our department had begun to grow because based on student credit hours, et cetera, service courses we were teaching, the number of graduate courses we were teaching, I was able to acquire additional faculty.
Who were some of the key faculty you brought in?
Oh, I brought in untold key faculty.
I guess the three that stick in all the students' minds were Dr. Don Clark and Dr. Jim Anderson, Dr. Larry Claiborne, Dr. Sabunowich,
Dr. Bill Jenkins, Dr. Benny Camp, Dr. J.W.
Dr. Stephen Safe, Dr. Merle Bailey, Dr. Amos, Dr. Hightower, Dr. Oh, let me see.
There were so many.
All right, numerically, when you became department head, the faculty was how many?
Three.
And when you retired?
Left 30.
30, and that's how many years?
Oh, I was department head for about 20 years, I guess.
68 to, you became department head in 68?
Yeah, about then, 68, to about 88.
Where did you recruit these faculty?
Everywhere?
Yes, I went, what I did, I went to,
three major scientific meetings every year with the intent of locating potential faculty.
I went to the Federated Society meeting, which is the largest meeting of biologists every year, about 10,000 or so.
I went to the
AVMA meeting every year, and I went to the, in Chicago every year I went to the Animal Research Workers Conference, and they always had at that, they had lots of graduate students presenting papers, and so I would go and rotate and find potential
graduate students or people that I thought were outstanding.
So I would start recruiting them early before they ever finished their PhD or lots of them.
And then I went for people that were different.
I remember I hired Dr. John Hunter and he had a
a degree in electrical engineering from Northwestern University, and a MS degree from Iowa State University in biomedical engineering, and then a PhD, or DVM from Purdue.
And he was a computer specialist that started the PLATO system, which was the first teaching system in the computer teaching system.
Anyhow, I would find these young people and nurture them, and we finally ended up, I guess, with the most diverse and probably the best veterinary physiology, pharmacology, toxicology department in the country.
Of course, one of the real keys I brought in from South Africa was Bill Jenkins, who's now chancellor at LSU.
And what I did, I kept a professorship open every year and brought in visiting.
I would go worldwide to find a visiting professor to bring in each year.
Jenkins was one I brought in on that program.
But all that, recruiting probably, and with the help of Dr.
because I had to take them all to his office, and he always had a good song and dance for them.
Higher administration helped when you're trying to recruit people to see that there's an interest all the way up through the system in faculty.
Let's also review.
When you became department head, did Dr. Price give you any advice or counsel about heading a department?
None whatsoever.
Everybody figured, you know, you either made it or you didn't make it, I guess.
As a young department head, I had to fall into executive committee, which met every week with
with all of the original founders that I talked about.
I always sat at the end of the table at these meetings.
Because you were the junior member?
I was a junior member and I just kind of stayed back in a way.
But what they could never understand is that during these executive committee meetings, I got more work done while I was sitting there writing proposals and reports and doing other things.
had a secretary of that group, and he told the dean one time, he said, Dr. McCready doesn't do anything during the meeting except write, and he doesn't pay any attention, and this and that and other.
And his colleagues, interesting because
I had a fellow department head write a letter to the dean one time, and he described me as being a piece of like Bermuda grass.
I got my tentacles into everything and all the money.
I did have many, many buildings.
and other things and resources.
I was just fortunate.
How would you describe your working relationship with Dean Price?
Oh, very good.
All the deans.
I never bothered them.
And when you became department head, did he have an associate dean at that time?
No, he had an assistant.
Dr. McMurray, when I was hired, then that gave Dr. McMurray a chance to go down and be the assistant to the dean, and he interviewed all the students and took care of student affairs and so forth.
Who was the dean's key clerical staff person?
Well, when I first came into the college, there was a lady, Mrs. Johnson, and then
Later on, I guess Amadelle Bacchus was the key individual all the way through Dr. Price's tenure.
Is she still living?
She's still living, doing very well.
Is she interviewable?
Yeah.
Yeah, she's, she's... B-A-C-K-U-S?
B-A-C-H-U-S.
And then... Amadell, and she's, she's in local directory, and she's, I see her every week at church.
What, what did, what were her, describe her function in the dean's office?
Oh, I guess as any good administrative secretary, she tried to reduce the workload on the dean by filtration, I guess, of the, and prioritizing the items and people that came to the office.
What kind of personality did she have?
Oh, Pleasant, all business.
Now, Libby Goss, did she?
Libby was a later addition.
She worked kind of for Iberdale.
And then there was a Mary Ned Bellick.
that became Dr. Price's secretary, I mean Dr. McMurray's secretary, and they handled all the student affairs.
During, what was your routine on a daily basis while you were department heading?
Well, when I was department head, I tried to come to the department early every morning, and then, of course, I still had all my teaching load, and I was trying to build a research program and trying to get a nice little institute of health
Grant and trying to with Baylor and trying and I moved to Grant from Baylor when I came on pulmonary hypertension.
So I had a research project going and I had teaching going and departmental administration and building buildings and programs and PhD programs and
But I made it, even when the faculty grew as it did, I tried to make a part, and I began to expand.
I had faculty in five different buildings at one time, and so I tried to
If at all possible, I tried to get into those buildings nearly every day, but at least once a week so that I was all, not to oversee or anything, just to,